---
title: Negation
---

Def. An integer n > 1 is composit if and only if there exist positive integers r and s such that n = rs and r != 1 and s != 1.

Def. An integer n > 1 is prime if and only if for all positive integers r and s, if n = rs, then r = 1 or s = 1.

Prove or Disprove:
> 1. For every positive integer n, the integer 3n is composit.  
> False (universally quantified --> disprove)  
> Counter example: Let n = 1. Then 3n = 3 * 1 = 3, which is prime.  

> 2. There exists an integer m such that m^2 - 1 is prime.  
> True (existentially quantified --> proove)  
> Proof: Let m = 2. Then m^2 - 1 = 2^2 -1 = 3, which is prime  

> 3. For all positive integers n, 2n^2 + 4 is composite.
> *Factor:* 2n^2 + 4 = 2(n^2 + 2)
> True (universlly quantified), this expression can be factored into two statements, neither of which are composit.
> Proof: Let n be any positive integer. Then 2n^2 + 4 = 2(n^2 + 2). So 2 and n^2 + 2 are both integers.
> And 2 != 1, also n^2 + 2 >= 1^2 + 2 = 3. Thus n^2 + 2 != 1. Therefore 2n^2 + 4 is composite.

> 4. There exists a positive integer n such that n^2 + 3n + 2 is prime.
> False (existentialy quantified) we know this is false because n^2 + 3n + 2 = (n + 2)(n + 1) <-- that factors to two expressions where neither is equal to 1
> Prove: __For all__ positive integers n, n^2 + 3n + 2 is composite.
> Disproof: Let n be a positive integer. Then
> n^2 + 2n + 2 = (n + 1)(n + 2). Observe n+ 1 and n+ 2are positive integers and
> n + 2 != 1 since n + 2 >= 3. Therefore n^3 + 3n + 2 is composite.

# Summary:

Proove P => Q
Direct proof: Assume P. Proove Q.
Proof by contrapositive: Assume ~Q. Proove ~P.

**Universal**
for all x, P(x)
proof: Let x be arbitrary

True:
(don't argue from an example)

False:
counter example
let x = _____
Show ~P(x)

**Existential**
there exists x such that 

True:
proof: Let x = _____
(okey to argue from an example)

False
Disproof: For all x, ~P(x)
Let x be arbitrary
Proove ~P(x)
