---
title: Contradiction
---

- Therem: Any integer n > 1 is divisible by a prime number.
- For any integer n > 1, there exists a prime number p such that p|n.

> Examples:  
> n = 2    p = 2    2|2  
> n = 3    p = 3    3|3  
> n = 7    p = 7    7|7  
>  
> p        p        p|p  

Theorem: Unique Factorization Theorem - Given any integer n > 1, there exists a
positive integer k and distinct prie numbers p1, p2, ..., pk and positive
integers e1, e2, ..., ek such that n = p1, p2, ..., pk and this factorization is
unique (disreguarding the order of factors).

- **Note:** The number 1 is not prime.
- Cryptography
- RSA
- **Note:** A 200-digit number took 18 months and used over half a century of computing time.

# Proof by Contradiction
> **Contradiction rule**
> ~p => c  (Where c is a contradiction)  
> Therefore P  

> **Proof by Contradiction**  
> Suppose, to the contrary, that **p** is false.  
> .  
> .  
> .  
> [Show some contradiction]  
> Therefore, P.  

> **Example**  
> Theorem: There is no greatest integer.  
> Suppose, to the contrary, that there is a greatest integer, say N.  
> However, N + 1 is an integer and N + 1 > N.  
> Threrfore, there is no greater integer.  

> **Example**  
> Theorem: There is no smallest positive real number.  

> **Example**  
> Theorem: The square root of 2 is irrational.  
> Suppose, to the contrary, that the square root of 2 is rational.  
> Then there exist integers a and b with b != 0
> such that the square root of 2 != a/b and we assume that a/b is in lowest terms.  
> Squaring both sides, we have 2 = a^2/b^2 or 2b^2 = a^2.  
> Now since b^2 is an integer, 2b^2 is even.  
> Thus a^2 is even, which implies a is even.  
> Thus a = 2k for some integer k. It follows that 2b^2 = (2k)^2 = 4k^2.  
> So b^2 = 2k^2. Hence b^2 is even, implying b is even.  
> So b = 2l for some integer l. But this contradicts that a/b is in lowest terms.  
> Therefore the square root of 2 is irrational.

> **Alternate Example**  
> Unique Factorization Theorem  

> **Example**  
> Lemma: For any integer a and prime p, if p|a, then p /| (a+1).  
> Proof: Suppose not. That there exists an integer a and a prime p
> such that p|a and p|(a+1).  
> Then a = pr for some integer r  
> and a+1 = ps for some integer s.  
> Subtracting, we get 1 = a + 1 = a = ps - pr = p(s-r).  
> Thus p|1. So p = 1 or p = -1.  
> This contridicts that p is prime (p >= 2).  

> **Example**  
> Theorem: There are infinately many primes.  
> Proof: Suppose to the contrary, that there are **finitely** many primes
> p1, p2, ..., pk. Let a = p1, p2, ..., pk. Notice that each pi divides a.  
> Thus pi /| (a+1). So the integer a+1 has no other prime divisors and thus must be prime.  
> But this contradicts that the list of p1, p2, ..., pk contained all possible primes.

# Proof by cases
Two integers m and n have the same parity if they are either both even or both odd.

**Theorem:** For every two integers m and n,
3m + 5 is even if and only if m and n have
the same parity.

> Proof (<=) Proove if m and n have the same parity, then 3m + 5n is even.  
> Assume m and n have the same parity.  
> Case 1: m and n are both even.  
>     [Proove 3m + 5n is even]  
> Case 2: m and n are both odd.  
>     [Proove 3m + 5n is even.]  
>  
> (=>) Prove if 3m + 5n is even, then m and n have the same parity (by contrapositive).  
> Assume m and n have opposite parity.  
> Case 1: m is even and n is odd.  
>     [Prove 3m + 5n is odd.]  
> Case 2: m is odd and n is even.  
>     [Proove 3m + 5n is odd.]  

**Result:** For any sets A, B, and C, (A-B) ⋃ (A-C) = A - (B ⋂ C)

> **Proof:** First we show (A-B) ⋃ (A-C) ⊆ A - (B ⋂ C)  
>     Let x ∈ (A-B) ⋃ (A-C).  
>     Then x x ∈ A-B **OR** x ∈ A-C  
>     Case 1: x ∈ A - B  
>         [Show x ∈ A - (B ⋂ C)]  
>     Case 2: x ∈ A - C  
>         [Show x ∈ A - (B ⋂ C)]  
