---
title: Induction
---

# Sequences

> 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, ...  
> 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, ...  
> 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, ...  

A sequence is an ordered list of terms.

> 2,   4,   6,   8,   ...  
> 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, ...  
> 1*2, 2*2, 3*2, 4*2, ...  

A general (or explicit) formula for the nth term.

a<sub>n</sub> = 2n

## Notation

> I want to write the shorthand version of: 1/2 + 2/3 + 3/4 + 4/5 + ...
> see note sheet #9q34

# Principle of Mathematical Induction

To proove statements of the form:
    "For all integers n >= 1, P(n)."

> If   1)  P(1) is true  
> and  2)  the statement  
>             "for all integers k >= 1, P(k) => P(k+1)"  
>           is true  

The metaphore for this is a ladder. If I can get the next rung,
then I can get the the rung after that one.

To use the principle of Mathematical Induction
1. Proove the statement is true for n=1 (base step or base case).
2. Let k >= 1 be some arbitrary integer.
3. Assume P(k). This is called the inductive hypothesis.
4. Proove P(k+1). This is called the inductive step.
5. Therefor, P(n) for all n >= 1.

Continued on paper notes: #zrepryt


# Statement of Mathematical Induction

Let a be some fixed non-negative integer.
Let P(n) be a statement define d for all integers n >= a.
If P(a) is true ...

Conjecture: Using 3 cent coins and 5 cent coins, any change amount n >= 8 can be made.

8 = 3 + 5
9 = 3 + 3 + 3
10 = 5 + 5
11 = 3 + 3 + 5
12 = 3 + 3 + 3

Case 1 = no 5 cent coins
Case 2 = at least oe 5 cent coin

Result: For all change amounts n >= 8, you can make n cents using only 3 cent coins and 5 cent coins.

**Proof by induction**:
Observe that 8 = 3 + 5, prooving the base case.
Let k >= 8 be any arbitrary integer.
Assume that k cents can be made by using only 3 cent and 5 cent coins.
We claim that (k + 1) cents can be made using only 3 cent coins and at least one 5 cent coin.
Case 1: at lest one 5 cent coin is used to make k cents.
    Trade one 5 cent coin for each 3 cent coins.
    The total would then be k - 5 + 2 * 3 = k + 1 cents.
Case 2:
    no 5 cent coins are used in making k cent coins.
    Since k >= 8 and only 3 cent coins are used, we have *at least three* 3 cent coins.
    Trade three 3 cent coins or two 5 cent coins.
    The total would then be k - 3 * 3 + 2 * 5 = k + 1.
    Therefore, by the Principle of Mathematical Induction, any amount n >= 8 can be made.

***

**Proof by Mathematical Induction using Factorials**
1 * 1! + 2 * 2! + 3 * 3! .. + n * n! = (n + 1)! = 1 for all n >= 1.
Proof: Observe that when n = 1, 1 * 1! = 1 == 2! - 1 = (1 + 1)! - 1 prooving the base case.
Let k >= 1 be any arbitrary integer.
Assume 1 * 1! + 2 * 2! + 3 * 3! .. + k * k! = (k + 1)! - 1.
We want to show that 1 * 1! + 2 * 2! + 3 * 3! .. + k * k! = (k + 1) * (k + 1)! = (k + 2)! - 1
1 * 1! + 2 * 2! + 3 * 3! .. + k * k! = (k + 1) * (k + 1)! = (k + 1)! - 1 + (k + 1) * (k + 1)!
                                                          = (k + 1)! * (1 + k + 1) - 1
                                                          = (k + 1)! * (k + 2) - 1
                                                          = (k + 2)! - 1
By the P.M.I., E<sup>n</sup><sub>i=1</sub> i * i = (n + 1)! - 1 for all n >= 1.
*The statement above should be formatted in the inductive notation format which wont work in markdown.*

***

Prove that n < 2<sup>n</sup> for all n >= 1.
Proof: Observe that 1 < 2<sup>1</sup>, prooving the base case.
Let k >= 1 be any arbitrary integer.
Assume k < 2<sup>k</sub>.
We want to show that k + 1 < 2<sup>k+1</sup>
Observe that 2<sup>k+1</sup> = 2<sup>k</sup> * 2 > k * 2 = 2k = k + k >= k + 1
By the P.M.I., n < 2<sup>n</sup> for all n >= 1.

***

Prove that n! is > 2<sup>n</sup> for all n >= 4.
Proof: Notice that 4 ! = 24 > 16 = 2<sup>4</sup>.
Let k >= 4 be any arbitrary integer.
Assume k! > 2<sup>k</sup>.
We want to show (k + 1)! > 2<sup>k+1</sup>
Observe (k + 1)! = (k + 1) * k! > (k + 1) * 2<sup>k</sup> >= 5 * 2 > 2 * 2<sup>k</sup> = 2<sup>k+1</sup>.
By P.M.I. n! > 2<sup>n</sup> for all n >= 4.
